GEP-2643: TLSRoute (#4064)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-2643/index.md

  // Hostnames defines a set of SNI hostnames that should match against the
  // SNI attribute of TLS ClientHello message in TLS handshake. This matches
  // the RFC 1123 definition of a hostname with 2 notable exceptions:
  //
  // 1. IPs are not allowed in SNI hostnames per RFC 6066.
  // 2. A hostname may be prefixed with a wildcard label (`*.`). The wildcard
  //    label must appear by itself as the first label.
  //
  // If a hostname is specified by both the Listener and TLSRoute, there
  // must be at least one intersecting hostname for the TLSRoute to be
  // attached to the Listener. For example:
  //
  // * A Listener with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one of `test.example.com` or
  //   `*.example.com`.
  // * A Listener with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one hostname that matches the Listener
  //   hostname. For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both
  //   match. On the other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not
  //   match.
  //
  // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, any

>   // TLSRoute hostnames that do not match the Listener hostname MUST be

Author: because you can be attaching to a Gateway that has multiple Listeners, and not specifying a sectionName on the `parentRef` will make the route try to attach to any Listener, so any Listener hostname

* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy passes through the request directly to one or more objects,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

## Conflict management and precedences

The following conflict situations are covered by TLSRoute and TLS passthrough cases:

* When a Gateway contains a listener with `protocol=TLS`, the Gateway MUST NOT
allow any other kind of listener on the same port and the Gateway SHOULD be
marked as `Accepted=False` in case there are different kinds of listeners on
the same port.  
* When a Gateway contains a listener with `protocol=TLS` and `tls.mode=Passthrough`,
the `Gateway` MUST NOT allow another listener on the same port with a different
`tls.mode` and the `Gateway` SHOULD be marked as `Accepted=False`.  
* Any violating Listener should have a Condition `Conflicted=True`.  
* If a hostname is specified by both the `Listener` and `TLSRoute`, there must
be at least one intersecting hostname for the `TLSRoute` to be attached to the
`Listener`.  

>   * A `Gateway listener` with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that

Reviewer: I think the API docs are correct here. There's some ancient context in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/43, but I believe the intent is that a route can support multiple multiple hostnames to be able to attach to separate parents (e.g. a `staging.example.com` listener and an `example.com` listener on an entirely different gateway), whereas listeners must be distinct.

>   * A `Gateway listener` with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that

Author: what bothers me here is a bit of the semantics and coverage. For me it makes sense that a Listener, which is an upper/parent/ancestor resource can be more generic (eg.: I listen and accept routes of *.example.tld) but the TLSRoute hostname/s should be more specific.

Is the idea of having a wildcard on a route something like:
- Gateway1 - tls1.example.com
- Gateway2 - tls2.example.com
- TLSRoute - Parents Gateway1/Gateway2 - hostname `*.example.com`

This may seem a bit confusing from a using perspective, IMO regarding TLSRoutes (tho we say at some point of this GEP that we may support ALPN routing in the future so this can make more sense).

I would like to hear from other implementors as well how much difficulty this will bring for the TLSRoute case, but if we are ok on having TLSRoute doing this sort of reverse match, I can rollback the comment here

>   * A `Gateway listener` with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that

Reviewer: > Is the idea of having a wildcard on a route something like

Yes, that has been my understanding of the intent of this design. It's also been backed into the Gateway API UX for years now between Gateway listeners and HTTPRoute, and not something I think makes a lot of sense to try changing or taking a different approach at this point.

>   * A `Gateway listener` with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that

Reviewer 2: Additionally, a `hostname` on the Listener is not required. It is a valid CUJ to define `hostnames` only on the TLSRoute, and in such cases, supporting support wildcards makes sense.

  specifies `test.example.com` but does not match a `TLSRoute` that specifies `*.example.com`  
  * A `Gateway listener` with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that
  specifies at least one hostname that matches the `Gateway listener` hostname.
  For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both match. On the
  other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not match.  
  * If both the `Gateway listener` and `TLSRoute` specify hostnames, any `TLSRoute`
  hostnames that do not match the `Gateway listener` hostname MUST be ignored
  for that Listener. For example, if a `Gateway listener` specified `*.example.com`,
  and the  `TLSRoute` specified `test.example.com` and `test.example.net`,
  the later must not be considered for a match.  
  * In any of the cases above, the `TLSRoute` should have a `Condition` of `Accepted=True`.

## Conformance Details

###  Feature Names

* TLSRoute

> ### Conformance tests

Author: cc @rostislavbobo so we can discuss a bit more about it :)

Reviewer 2: We'll definitely need conformance tests for
- Mixed TLS termination on Gateway listeners, which today will mark all such listeners as `Conflicted` with `Reason: ListenerConflict` due to incompatible TLS modes (see [comment](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/4064/files#r2512417073))
- Mixed TLS termination on Gateway listener and ListenerSet listener, where the conflicting listener on the Gateway is accepted based on the [Listener Precedence](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1713/#listener-precedence)

Author: ok, closing this thread then. We should map this on ListenerSet gep

  // 2. A hostname may be prefixed with a wildcard label (`*.`). The wildcard
  //    label must appear by itself as the first label.
  //
  // If a hostname is specified by both the Listener and TLSRoute, there
  // must be at least one intersecting hostname for the TLSRoute to be
  // attached to the Listener. For example:
  //
  // * A Listener with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one of `test.example.com` or
  //   `*.example.com`.
  // * A Listener with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one hostname that matches the Listener
  //   hostname. For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both
  //   match. On the other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not
  //   match.
  //
  // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, any
  // TLSRoute hostnames that do not match the Listener hostname MUST be
  // ignored. For example, if a Listener specified `*.example.com`, and the
  // TLSRoute specified `test.example.com` and `test.example.net`,
  // `test.example.net` must not be considered for a match.
  //

>   // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, and none

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to precise that Listener's protocol needs to be of type: TLS and that TLSRoutes only applies to Listeners with this protocol. Is this said somewhere in the doc/spec?

Author: agreed. As a heads up, the API here was copied exactly from the existing code, so the idea is that we also make the proper updates on the API based on the comments here.

That said, we do not explicitly say anywhere here that TLSRoute is attacheable to Listeners of type TLS and Passthrough, just on places like https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/tls/

I will make this explicit on this doc

Author: Added as part of TLSRouteSpec, closing this

  // match with the criteria above, then the TLSRoute is not accepted. The
  // implementation must raise an 'Accepted' Condition with a status of
  // `False` in the corresponding RouteParentStatus.
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16

>   Hostnames []Hostname `json:"hostnames,omitempty"`

Author: This is what exists on the current API, but IMO the hostnames should be part of a `TLSRouteRule` and not its own field on the spec.

It doesn't make much sense that the rules are an array, that contain an array of backendRefs, but the hostnames are outside of it, but maybe there's some more context here.

Reviewer 2: Synced to @youngnick and @howardjohn and although matching SNI under TLSRouteRule has advantages, moving `hostnames` would be a substantial breaking change for many customers using TLSRoutes today, and using conversion webhooks isn't really under consideration. 

So we're leaning toward promoting `TLSRoute.hostnames[]` to standard now, and monitoring adoption to collect use cases and determine if there is a need for SNI-based fan-out.

API request flow for a gateway implemented using a `TLSRoute` is:
* A client makes a request to https://foo.example.com.
* DNS resolves the name to a `Gateway` address.
* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy passes through the request directly to one or more objects,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

## Conflict management and precedences

The following conflict situations are covered by TLSRoute and TLS passthrough cases:

* When a Gateway contains a listener with `protocol=TLS`, the Gateway MUST NOT
allow any other kind of listener on the same port and the Gateway SHOULD be
marked as `Accepted=False` in case there are different kinds of listeners on
the same port.  
* When a Gateway contains a listener with `protocol=TLS` and `tls.mode=Passthrough`,
the `Gateway` MUST NOT allow another listener on the same port with a different
`tls.mode` and the `Gateway` SHOULD be marked as `Accepted=False`.  

> * Any violating Listener should have a Condition `Conflicted=True`.  

Author: From a discussion that we had: is this for any listener, for the one added later? If there is a conflict listener on the TLSRoute case, do we want to mark all of Listeners as conflicted? Should we stop serving in this case, and mark Accepted=false?

Per @Miciah comment:
```
The GatewaySpec godoc is explicit: 'If a set of Listeners contains Listeners that are not distinct, then those Listeners are Conflicted, and the implementation MUST set the "Conflicted" condition in the Listener Status to "True"', and, "The implementation MUST NOT pick one conflicting Listener as the winner."

The godoc for ListenerConditionOverlappingTLSConfig re-iterates: "This condition MUST be set on all Listeners with overlapping TLS config."
```
* what if we have a conflict? Do we really want all of the listeners to be gone?
* what if we are using ListenerSet?

* If a hostname is specified by both the `Listener` and `TLSRoute`, there must
be at least one intersecting hostname for the `TLSRoute` to be attached to the
`Listener`.  
  * A `Gateway listener` with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that
  specifies `test.example.com` but does not match a `TLSRoute` that specifies `*.example.com`  
  * A `Gateway listener` with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that
  specifies at least one hostname that matches the `Gateway listener` hostname.
  For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both match. On the
  other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not match.  
  * If both the `Gateway listener` and `TLSRoute` specify hostnames, any `TLSRoute`
  hostnames that do not match the `Gateway listener` hostname MUST be ignored
  for that Listener. For example, if a `Gateway listener` specified `*.example.com`,
  and the  `TLSRoute` specified `test.example.com` and `test.example.net`,
  the later must not be considered for a match.  
  * In any of the cases above, the `TLSRoute` should have a `Condition` of `Accepted=True`.

> ## Multiplexing support

Author: This part needs some discussion/attention:
* Is Multiplexing support a core feature, or a implementation specific feature?
* Previously we state that a Gateway with a TLS termination can only have TLSRoutes, but here we say that multiple listeners on the same port, for different types can be accepted. So the conditions and conflict management should be changed to reflect this (and the conformance tests), if we agree that this case is possible
* What conditions should an implementation add when this is not supported? We need to word it explicitly on the GEP and the expected conformance tests

Author: I think we can add initially the multiplexing as implementation specific as is. 

I did a test with Istio and was able to check that it works OOTB, I expect that at least any other envoy, haproxy and nginx implementation can work with it.

# GEP-2643: TLS/SNI based routing / TLSRoute

* Issue: [#2643](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2643)
* Status: Standard

## TLDR

This GEP documents the implementation of a route type that uses the Server Name
Indication attribute (aka SNI) of a TLS handshake to make the routing decision.

While this feature is also known sometimes as TLS passthrough, where after the 
server name is identified, the gateway does a full encrypted passthrough of the 
communication, this GEP will also cover cases where a TLS communication is 

> terminated on the Gateway and passed unencrypted to a backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terminated on the Gateway before being passed to a backend.
```

Author: added here, will post the update soon

  listeners:
  - name: somelistener
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    hostname: "*.example.com"
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
      kinds:
      - kind: TLSRoute
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-tls-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - foo.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: tls-backend
      port: 443
```

A typical [north/south](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/#northsouth-traffic)
API request flow for a gateway implemented using a `TLSRoute` is:
* A client makes a request to https://foo.example.com.
* DNS resolves the name to a `Gateway` address.
* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy passes through the request directly to one or more objects,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

### TLSRoute + TLS Termination
In this workflow, the TLS traffic will be matched against the `SNI attribute` of 

> the request, terminated on the `Gateway` and passed unencrypted as a `TCP` connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the request, terminated on the `Gateway` and passed as a `TCP` connection
```

May be re-encrypted by mesh ingress implementations or BackendTLSPolicy. I don't think it's necessary to mention that explicitly, just remove the explicit "unencrypted".

# GEP-2643: TLS/SNI based routing / TLSRoute

* Issue: [#2643](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2643)
* Status: Standard

## TLDR

This GEP documents the implementation of a route type that uses the Server Name
Indication attribute (aka SNI) of a TLS handshake to make the routing decision.

While this feature is also known sometimes as TLS passthrough, where after the 
server name is identified, the gateway does a full encrypted passthrough of the 
communication, this GEP will also cover cases where a TLS communication is 

> terminated on the Gateway before being passed unencrypted to a backend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
terminated on the Gateway before being passed to a backend.
```

"unencrypted" is unnecessary as there are options for re-encrypting the Gateway auto Backend. The “Request flow” covers both cases well.

## Goals

* Provide a TLS route type, based on the SNI identification.
* Support both Termination (extended support) and Passthrough (core support) TLS modes for TLSRoute
* Provide load balancing of a TLS route, allowing a user to define a route, 
based on the SNI identification that should pass the traffic to N load balanced backends

## Longer Term Goals

> * Implement capabilities for [ESNI](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/what-is-encrypted-sni/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Implement capabilities for [ECH](https://blog.cloudflare.com/encrypted-client-hello/)
```

the request and then directed to the backends.

This workflow MUST be supported on Core support level.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway-tlsroute
spec:
  gatewayClassName: "my-class"
  listeners:
  - name: somelistener
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    hostname: "*.example.com"
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
      kinds:
      - kind: TLSRoute
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-tls-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - foo.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: tls-backend
      port: 443
```

A typical [north/south](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/#northsouth-traffic)
API request flow for a gateway implemented using a `TLSRoute` is:
* A client makes a request to https://foo.example.com.
* DNS resolves the name to a `Gateway` address.
* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.

> * The reverse proxy passes through the request directly to one or more objects,

Reviewer 2: What would an example of passing to multiple objects?

Author: I see, I have fixed it here

kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-rtmp-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - rtmp.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: rtmp-backend
      port: 12345
```

A typical [north/south](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/#northsouth-traffic)
API request flow for a gateway implemented using both `TLSRoute` is:
* A client makes a request to `rtmps://rtmp.example.com:443`.
* DNS resolves the name to a `Gateway` address.
* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy terminates the TLS negotiation on the `Gateway`.
* The reverse proxy passes unencrypted request to one or more objects,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

### TLSRoute + Mixed Termination
In this workflow, the TLS traffic will be matched against the `SNI attribute` of 
the request, and based on the SNI attribute be directed to the backends on Passthrough
mode or be terminated on the `Gateway` and passed unencrypted to the backends.

> This workflow CAN be supported on Implementation Specific support level and will

Author: moved to Extended, removed the phrase that it will be supported on a future GEP. As we have discussed this is already supported (the mix of termination and non termination). Lmk wdyt

> be covered on a further GEP.

Reviewer 2: So for now, if somebody tries to configure a mixed TLS termination on Gateway listeners on the same port, all such listeners will be marked as `Conflicted`. Standard conflict resolution doesn't work in this case as Gateway controller can't deterministically decide which listener was oldest for example (because listeners are defined inline within a single Gateway resource, they share the same creation timestamp).

# GEP-2643: TLS/SNI based routing / TLSRoute

* Issue: [#2643](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2643)
* Status: Standard

## TLDR

This GEP documents the implementation of a route type that uses the Server Name
Indication attribute (aka SNI) of a TLS handshake to make the routing decision.

While this feature is also known sometimes as TLS passthrough, where after the 
server name is identified, the gateway does a full encrypted passthrough of the 
communication, this GEP will also cover cases where a TLS communication is 
terminated on the Gateway before being passed to a backend.

## Goals

* Provide a TLS route type, based on the SNI identification.
* Support both Passthrough (core support) and Termination (extended support) TLS modes for TLSRoute

> * Provide load balancing of a TLS route, allowing a user to define a route, 

Reviewer 4: Is the LB option for both passthrough and termination modes?

based on the SNI identification that should pass the traffic to N load balanced backends

## Longer Term Goals
* Implement capabilities for [ESNI](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/what-is-encrypted-sni/)
* Implement capabilities for [ECH](https://blog.cloudflare.com/encrypted-client-hello/)
* Extend TLSRouteRule to support hostname being a matcher

## Non-Goals
* Provide an interface for users to define different listeners or ports for the
`TLSRoute` - This will be covered by the [ListenerSet enhancement](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1713/).
* Describe re-encryption capabilities when TLS Termination is being used - This will

> be covered by [GEP-4274](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/4274), extending

Reviewer 4: nit: We haven't decided that this will be covered.
```suggestion
* Describe re-encryption capabilities when TLS Termination is being used - This will
be proposed in [GEP-4274](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/4274), extending
```

## Introduction

While many application routing cases can be implemented using HTTP/L7 matching
(the tuple `protocol:hostname:port:path`), there are some specific cases where direct,
encrypted communication to the backend may be required, without further assertion. For example:
* A backend that is TLS based but not HTTP based (e.g., a Kafka service, or a
Postgres service, with its listener being TLS enabled).
* Some WebRTC solutions.
* Backends that can require direct client-certificate authentication (e.g., OAuth).

For the example cases above, it is desired that the routing is made as a passthrough
mode, where the `Gateway` passes the packets to the backend without terminating TLS.

On some other cases, it is desired that the termination is done on the `Gateway`
and the proxy passes the unencrypted packets to the backend without caring about 
attributes other than a TCP communication.

While this routing is possible using other mechanisms such as a `TCPRoute` or a
Kubernetes service of type `LoadBalancer`, it may be desired to have a single point
of traffic convergence (like one single `LoadBalancer`) for reasons like cost,

> traffic control, etc.

Reviewer 4: One single LB is a great idea, but can you explain why this is only possible using SNI and TLSRoute?

Author: the point here is not about being possible just using SNI and TLSRoute. It is about being DESIRED to have a single point of traffic convergence for non HTTPs traffic.

eg.: 
- I have 3 services that are Postgres. They all listen on port 5432. They all are TLS enabled. I can create a service of type LoadBalancer for each of them, but this will incur in costs
- I have 3 services that are Postgres. Same situation as above. Instead, I could use TCPRoute, but then I would need different ports for each service on my listener (because TCPRoute is classified only by the dstip:dstport)
- Same scenario as above. I can use the SNI attribute (postgres1.tld, postgres2.tld, postgres3.tld) to listen the traffic all on the same port (5432) but classify it based on the SNI attribute

An implementation of `TLSRoute` achieves this end using the
[server_name TLS attribute](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
to determine what backend should be used for a given request. `TLSRoute` thereby

> enables the use of a single gateway listener to handle traffic for multiple routes.

Reviewer 4: Any gateway listener can handle traffic for multiple routes, why point this out here?

Author: removed as it is not adding value

## API

> 

Reviewer 4: You could be explicit and add all the boilerplate for TLSRoute, with TLSRouteSpec and TLSRouteStatus.

Author: I am very reluctant of having full APIs defined on GEPs, but this is my opinion. I think they add a lot of repeated information. But also, I see that we need some starting point for a source of truth for the API.

```golang
// TLSRouteSpec defines the expected behavior of a TLSRoute.
// A TLSRoute MUST be attached to a Listener of protocol TLS.

> // Core: The listener CAN be of type Passthrough

Reviewer 4: Isn't mode Passthrough a MUST for Core support?

  // attached to the Listener. For example:
  //
  // * A Listener with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one of `test.example.com` or
  //   `*.example.com`.
  // * A Listener with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one hostname that matches the Listener
  //   hostname. For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both
  //   match. On the other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not
  //   match.
  // * A listener with `something.example.com` as the hostname matches a 
  //   TLSRoute with hostname `*.example.com`.
  //
  // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, any
  // TLSRoute hostnames that do not match any Listener hostname MUST be
  // ignored. For example, if a Listener specified `*.example.com`, and the
  // TLSRoute specified `test.example.com` and `test.example.net`,
  // `test.example.net` must not be considered for a match.
  //
  // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, and none
  // match with the criteria above, then the TLSRoute is not accepted for that 

>   // Listener. If the TLSRoute does not match any Listener on the parent, the 

Reviewer 4: nit
```suggestion
  // Listener. If the TLSRoute does not match any Listener on its parent, the 
```

  // implementation must raise an 'Accepted' Condition with a status of
  // `False` in the corresponding RouteParentStatus.
  // 
  // A Listener MUST be of type TLS when a TLSRoute attaches to it. The 
  // implementation MUST raise an 'Accepted' Condition with a status of
  // `False` in the corresponding RouteParentStatus with the reason 
  // of "UnsupportedValue" in case a Listener of the wrong type is used.
  // Core: A TLS listener CAN have mode Passthrough
  // Extended: A TLS listener CAN have mode Terminate 
  // </gateway:util:excludeFromCRD>
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
  Hostnames []Hostname `json:"hostnames,omitempty"`
  // Rules is a list of TLS matchers and actions.
  //
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=1

>   Rules []TLSRouteRule `json:"rules,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: No one has mentioned timeouts for this route type?  Why not include them? Won't the client want to know if the connection timed out?  

Also, if frontend tls termination is to be allowed, what about the backend being able to perform header or path matching?  We'd need more rules to express that. (But I do prefer that we don't allow frontend tls termination on TLSRoute for this reason and for keeping TLSRoute single-purpose.)

}

type TLSRouteRule struct {
  // Name is the name of the route rule. This name MUST be unique within a Route if it is set.
  //
  // +optional
  Name *SectionName `json:"name,omitempty"`

>   // BackendRefs (same as other BackendRef here)

Reviewer 4: If you want to use this data for load balancing, why not also specify a LB algorithm, like round-robin, random, or other?  You might also mention that the BackendRef contains a weight, if that is the only algorithmic option for traffic distribution.

    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - name: listener
        kind: Secret
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-rtmp-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - rtmp.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: rtmp-backend
      port: 12345
```

A typical [north/south](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/#northsouth-traffic)
API request flow for a gateway implemented using both `TLSRoute` is:
* A client makes a request to `rtmps://rtmp.example.com:443`.
* DNS resolves the name to a `Gateway` address.
* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy terminates the TLS negotiation on the `Gateway`.
* The reverse proxy passes unencrypted request to one or more objects,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

In case the implementation does not support this TLSRoute termination, it MUST 
add the Listener status as:

```yaml
listeners:
  - attachedRoutes: 0

>     name: my-terminated-listener

Author: fixed

In this case, there is no conflict as the most specific hostname MUST be chosen:

```yaml
spec:
  listeners:
  - hostname: app.user1.tld
    name: listener1
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
  - hostname: "*.user1.tld"
    name: listener2
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
status:
 listeners:
  - name: listener1
    conditions:
    - reason: Accepted
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - reason: NoConflicts
      status: "False"
      type: Conflicted
  - name: listener2
    conditions:
    - reason: Accepted
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - reason: NoConflicts
      status: "False"
      type: Conflicted
```

### Two listeners of type TLS with different termination modes

As the support for this feature is `Extended`, in case the implementation
does not support mixed modes it MUST mark the listeners as conflicted with the 
reason `ProtocolConflict`:

```yaml
spec:
  listeners:
  - hostname: "*.user2.tld"
    name: listener1
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
  - hostname: "*.user1.tld"
    name: listener2
    port: 443

>     protocol: TLS

Author: it would, because we say we don't support multiplexing now

    - reason: ProtocolConflict
      status: "True"
      type: Conflicted
```

## Hostname intersection between Gateway and TLSRoutes

The following are hostname intersection cases between the Gateway and TLSRoutes

* If a hostname is specified by both the `Listener` and `TLSRoute`, there MUST
be at least one intersecting hostname for the `TLSRoute` to be attached to the
`Listener`.  
  * A `Gateway listener` with `test.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that
  specifies at least one of `test.example.com` or `*.example.com`  
  * A `Gateway listener` with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches a `TLSRoute` that
  specifies at least one hostname that matches the `Gateway listener` hostname.
  For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both match. On the
  other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not match.  
  * If both the `Gateway listener` and `TLSRoute` specify hostnames, any `TLSRoute`
  hostnames that do not match the `Gateway listener` hostname MUST be ignored
  for that Listener. For example, if a `Gateway listener` specified `*.example.com`,
  and the `TLSRoute` specified `test.example.com` and `test.example.net`,

>   the later must not be considered for a match.  

Reviewer 4: It seems as if this scenario should also cause an invalid route condition.  How is the user to know they misconfigured it unless the status condition reflects that?

Author: today, if there is only one hostname, it will be marked as "NoMatchingListenerHostname"

but if there are multiple hostnames, there is no condition added. This is the same behavior as HTTPRoute

| A single TLSRoute in the gateway-conformance-infra namespace, with a backendRef in another namespace without valid ReferenceGrant, should have the ResolvedRefs condition set to False. <br/> Code: [ReferenceGrant] and the request to the route MUST fail [Invalid ReferenceGrant Request] | TLSRoute conditions must have a `RefNotPermitted` status. A request to the route MUST fail | SupportTLSRoute + SupportReferenceGrant |
| A TLSRoute trying to attach to a gateway without a “tls” listener MUST be rejected  | TLSRoute should have a parent condition of type `Accepted=False` with Reason `NoMatchingParent`. Request to the route MUST fail. | SupportTLSRoute |
| A TLSRoute with a hostname that does not match the Gateway hostname MUST be rejected (eg.: route with hostname [www.example.com](http://www.example.com), gateway with hostname www1.example.com) <br/> Issue: [TLSRoute conformance] | Condition on the TLSRoute parent of type `Accepted=False` with Reason `NoMatchingListenerHostname`. Request to the route MUST fail. | SupportTLSRoute |

> | A TLSRoute with an IP on its hostname MUST be rejected | Condition on the TLSRoute parent of type `Accepted=False` with Reason `UnsupportedValue`. No request test is required, as the Listener will not be accepted | SupportTLSRoute |

Author: we don't have a CEL in place for IP validation, but that's a nice thing to have, good call. Let me add it here to the API definition.

I am also adding the validation of wildcards on the definition of hosts (per the spec of the API so we avoid bad hostnames directly on validation in this case

| A Gateway containing a Listener of type TLS/Passthrough and a Listener of type TLS/Terminate SHOULD NOT be accepted when mixed mode is not supported | Listener condition SHOULD have Condition Conflicted=True with reason `ProtocolConflict`. A request to any route attached to any of the listeners MUST fail. | SupportTLSRoute + SupportTLSRouteTermination + !SupportTLSRouteMixedMode |
| A Gateway with \*.example.tld on a TLS listener should allow a TLSRoute with hostname some.example.tld to be attached to it (and the same, but with a non wildcard hostname) <br/> Issue: [TLSRoute conformance] | TLSRoute should be able to attach to the Gateway using the matching hostname, a request should succeed | SupportTLSRoute  |
| Expose support for TLSRoute termination <br/> Issue: [Termination] | For a [Listener](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#listener) setting mode: "terminate", TLSRoute should be present in [ListenerStatus.SupportedKinds](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#listenerstatus) in case TLSRoute termination is supported | SupportTLSRouteTermination |

> | Explicitly expose that TLSRoute termination is not supported. <br/> Issue: [Termination] | For a [Listener](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#listener) setting mode: "terminate" and not being supported, a Listener entry MUST exist but TLSRoute MUST NOT be present in [ListenerStatus.SupportedKinds](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#listenerstatus). | SupportTLSRoute + !SupportTLSRouteTermination |

Reviewer 4: Can we dictate how the lack of support is implemented?  What if the implementation decides to just reject the Listener?  Otherwise, I don't recall seeing this directive about SupportedKinds mentioned earlier.

Author: discussed with @rostislavbobo and fixed both

* Status: Standard

## TLDR

This GEP documents the implementation of a route type that uses the Server Name
Indication attribute (aka SNI) of a TLS handshake to chose the route destination.

While this feature is also known sometimes as TLS passthrough, where after the 
server name is identified, the gateway does a full encrypted passthrough of the 
communication, this GEP will also cover cases where a TLS communication is 
terminated on the Gateway before being passed to a backend.

## Goals

* Provide a TLS route type, based on the SNI identification.
* Support both Passthrough (core support) and Termination (extended support) TLS modes for TLSRoute
* Provide load balancing of a TLS route, allowing a user to define a route, 
based on the SNI identification that should pass the traffic to N load balanced backends

## Longer Term Goals
* Implement capabilities for [ESNI](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/what-is-encrypted-sni/)
* Implement capabilities for [ECH](https://blog.cloudflare.com/encrypted-client-hello/)
* Extend TLSRouteRule to support hostname being a matcher

## Non-Goals
* Provide an interface for users to define different listeners or ports for the

> `TLSRoute` - This will be covered by the [ListenerSet enhancement](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1713/).

Author: added on my ongoing changes

`BackendTLSPolicy` to allow `TLSRoute`.
* When using `TLSRoute` passthrough, support `PROXY` protocol on the gateway listener.
* When using `TLSRoute` passthrough, support `PROXY` protocol on the communication
between the Gateway and the backend.
* Support TLS over UDP or UDP-based protocols such as `QUIC`.
* Support attributes other than the SNI/hostname for the route selection
* Support multiplexing (HTTPS and TLS protocols) on the same Listener - This should be covered
on [GEP-4271](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/4271)
* Define timeout for TLSRoute - This will be proposed in [GEP-4280](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/4280)

## Introduction

While many application routing cases can be implemented using HTTP/L7 matching
(the tuple `protocol:hostname:port:path`), there are some specific cases where direct,
encrypted communication to the backend may be required, without further assertion. For example:
* A backend that is TLS based but not HTTP based (e.g., a Kafka service, or a
Postgres service, with its listener being TLS enabled).
* Some WebRTC solutions.

> * Backends that can require direct client-certificate authentication (e.g., OAuth).

Reviewer 5: This isn't being rendered as a list, and I'm not sure why?

Reviewer 6: Adding white space around the list appears to fix the rendering issue.

```suggestion
encrypted communication to the backend may be required, without further assertion. For example:

* A backend that is TLS based but not HTTP based (e.g., a Kafka service, or a
Postgres service, with its listener being TLS enabled).
* Some WebRTC solutions.
* Backends that can require direct client-certificate authentication (e.g., OAuth).
```

attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy passes through the request directly to one object,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

### TLSRoute + TLS Termination
In this workflow, the TLS traffic will be matched against the `SNI attribute` of 
the request and terminated on the `Gateway`. 

This workflow CAN be supported on Extended support level and should be exposed with the
feature `SupportTLSRouteTermination`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway-tlsroute
spec:
  gatewayClassName: "my-class"
  listeners:
  - name: my-terminated-listener
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    hostname: "*.example.com"
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
      kinds:
      - kind: TLSRoute
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - name: listener
        kind: Secret
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-rtmp-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - rtmp.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: rtmp-backend
      port: 12345
```

> A typical [north/south](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/#northsouth-traffic)

Author: added

feature `SupportTLSRouteMixedMode`.

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway-tlsroute
spec:
  gatewayClassName: "my-class"
  listeners:
  - name: terminatelistener
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    hostname: "rtmp.example.com"
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
      kinds:
      - kind: TLSRoute
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - name: listener
        kind: Secret
  - name: passthroughlistener
    port: 443
    protocol: TLS
    hostname: "direct.example.com"
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
      kinds:
      - kind: TLSRoute
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-tls-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - direct.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: tls-backend
      port: 443
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: my-rtmp-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway-tlsroute
  hostnames:
  - rtmp.example.com
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: rtmp-backend
      port: 12345
```

> A typical [north/south](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/#northsouth-traffic)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A typical [north/south](../../concepts/glossary.md#northsouth-traffic)
```

API request flow for a gateway implemented using a `TLSRoute` is:
* A client makes a request to `rtmps://rtmp.example.com:443`.
* DNS resolves the name to a `Gateway` address.
* The reverse proxy receives the request on a `Listener` and uses the
[Server Name Indication](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6066#section-3)
attribute to match an `TLSRoute`.
* The reverse proxy terminates the TLS negotiation on the `Gateway`.
* The reverse proxy passes unencrypted request to one or more objects,
i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.
* A new request is made to `direct.example.com` and the same identification flow
happens.
* The reverse proxy receiving the request identifies that this is a Passthrough request
and passes through the request directly to one or more objects,

> i.e. `Service`, in the cluster based on `backendRefs` rules of the `TLSRoute`.

Author: added

| A single TLSRoute in the gateway-conformance-infra namespace, with a backendRef in another namespace without valid ReferenceGrant, should have the ResolvedRefs condition set to False. <br/> Code: [ReferenceGrant] and the request to the route MUST fail [Invalid ReferenceGrant Request] | TLSRoute conditions must have a `RefNotPermitted` status. A request to the route MUST fail | SupportTLSRoute + SupportReferenceGrant |
| A TLSRoute trying to attach to a gateway without a “tls” listener MUST be rejected  | TLSRoute should have a parent condition of type `Accepted=False` with Reason `NoMatchingParent`. Request to the route MUST fail. | SupportTLSRoute |
| A TLSRoute with a hostname that does not match the Gateway hostname MUST be rejected (eg.: route with hostname [www.example.com](http://www.example.com), gateway with hostname www1.example.com) <br/> Issue: [TLSRoute conformance] | Condition on the TLSRoute parent of type `Accepted=False` with Reason `NoMatchingListenerHostname`. Request to the route MUST fail. | SupportTLSRoute |

> | A Gateway containing a Listener of type TLS/Terminate SHOULD be accepted, and SHOULD direct the requests to the right TLSRoute when TLSRoute termination is supported. <br/> Issue: [Termination] | Being able to do a request to a TLS route being terminated on gateway (eg.: terminated.example.tld/xpto) | SupportTLSRoute + SupportTLSRouteTermination |

Reviewer 5: Is this really "MUST be accepted if Termination is supported"? Should we phrase it that way?

(Same applies to the other cases discussing termination.)

  //   `*.example.com`.
  // * A Listener with `*.example.com` as the hostname matches TLSRoutes
  //   that have specified at least one hostname that matches the Listener
  //   hostname. For example, `test.example.com` and `*.example.com` would both
  //   match. On the other hand, `example.com` and `test.example.net` would not
  //   match.
  // * A listener with `something.example.com` as the hostname matches a 
  //   TLSRoute with hostname `*.example.com`.
  //
  // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, any
  // TLSRoute hostnames that do not match any Listener hostname MUST be
  // ignored. For example, if a Listener specified `*.example.com`, and the
  // TLSRoute specified `test.example.com` and `test.example.net`,
  // `test.example.net` must not be considered for a match.
  //
  // If both the Listener and TLSRoute have specified hostnames, and none
  // match with the criteria above, then the TLSRoute is not accepted for that 
  // Listener. If the TLSRoute does not match any Listener on its parent, the 
  // implementation must raise an 'Accepted' Condition with a status of
  // `False` in the corresponding RouteParentStatus.
  // 

>   // A Listener MUST be of type TLS when a TLSRoute attaches to it. The 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  // A Listener MUST be have protocol set to TLS when a TLSRoute attaches to it. The 
```
It's a small thing, but the field is not called `type` - we have to be as precise as possible with this.

  Hostnames []Hostname `json:"hostnames,omitempty"`
  // Rules is a list of TLS matchers and actions.
  //
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=1
  Rules []TLSRouteRule `json:"rules,omitempty"`
}

// TLSRouteStatus defines the observed state of TLSRoute
type TLSRouteStatus struct {
	RouteStatus `json:",inline"`
}

type TLSRouteRule struct {
  // Name is the name of the route rule. This name MUST be unique within a Route if it is set.
  //
  // +optional
  Name *SectionName `json:"name,omitempty"`
  // BackendRefs (same as other BackendRef here)
  // +required
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
  BackendRefs []BackendRef `json:"backendRefs,omitempty"`
}
```

A validation change is required on `Gateway.spec.listeners` as users MUST define what
mode should be used on a TLS Listener, otherwise the mode may be defaulted to `Terminate`
per the current API specification:

```golang
type GatewaySpec struct {

  ...

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:message="tls mode must be set for protocol TLS",rule="self.all(l, (l.protocol == 'TLS' ? has(l.tls) && has(l.tls.mode) && l.tls.mode != '' : true))"

Author: @rostislavbobo I did the validation, here :)
